title: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS; BMW Shares Fall on Worries Over Rover
subtitle: 
author: Edmund L. Andrews
date: April 1, 1999
content:
Investors hammered shares of the Bavarian car maker BMW today, after the company's top executives gave analysts a vague and unconvincing description of their strategy for repairing Rover, the troubled British subsidiary.
BMW shares dropped more than 4 percent, to 606 euros ($565.58) from 633 euros ($590.78). The decline marked a shaky start for BMW's new chairman, Joachim Milberg, who had just made his first formal presentation to investment analysts since the ouster last month of his predecessor, Bernd Pischetsrieder.
It also signaled the depth of unease about the problems at Rover, which lost nearly $1 billion last year. The gloom appeared likely to persist even though the British Government announced late today that it would contribute an unspecified amount of money to help modernize Rover's main factory in the town of Longbridge.
Though BMW and the British Government had been haggling over the amount of financial support needed to keep the factory alive, most analysts had assumed that the two sides would reach a deal.

The bigger worries are about BMW's apparent commitment to have Rover keep building mid-priced cars, which have been the main source of Rover's problems, and how BMW would reduce Rover's costs.
Despite Mr. Milberg's attempt to show his sense of purpose, analysts complained that the company was vague and even evasive about his plans to cut costs and refocus the strategy. Deutsche Bank reduced its rating on BMW stock from ''neutral'' to ''underperform,'' while others said they had simply been disappointed by the presentation.
''The meeting was short of quantitative detail, and the company's answers on a number of points were evasive,'' said Suzanne Oliver, automobile analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston. ''It didn't really offer any explanation of how Rover will get back to profitability.''
In some ways, the stock's drop was a case of no news is bad news. BMW had already disclosed its basic results, which included Rover's loss of nearly $1 billion last year. And company executives had also already created a widespread impression of vagueness at a news conference on Tuesday to discuss the company's results in detail.
Though BMW's flagship brand enjoyed a strong growth in sales and profits last year, sales at Rover plunged. Rover's main problems have been with its disastrous mid-priced cars that compete with vehicles like Volkswagen's Golf.

Those problems led to a bruising battle over strategy among top executives and to the ouster of Mr. Pischetsrieder and the resignation of another top board member, Wolfgang Reitgzle.
Analysts said today they had been hoping for concrete financial details on BMW's goals for cost-cutting and refocusing. Klaus-Jurgen Melzner, Deutsche Bank's automobile analyst, complained that BMW had been almost contradictory about its plans to reposition Rover's midpriced cars, the R200 and R400. On the one hand, he said, BMW said the cars would be priced at ''premium'' levels; on the other, the company said it wanted to produce as many as 500,000 vehicles -- seemingly an attempt at cracking the lower-priced mass market.
Deutsche Bank also complained that BMW had made fairly small provisions for restructuring costs.
Ms. Oliver, at Credit Suisse First Boston, said she still ranked BMW shares as an ''unenthusiastic hold.'' But she was dismayed by the lack of specifics and by hints that BMW's profit might slip in 1999 for the second consecutive year. Dragged down by Rover, BMW's profit sank 28 percent in 1998 to 925 million marks, or about $514 million.
None of that was much of a surprise. BMW executives repeatedly cautioned in recent weeks that Rover would not return to profitability as quickly as they had hoped. They had all but written off their original goal of turning a profit at Rover in 2000 and said they would be happy to achieve one in 2001.
Nor was it much of a surprise that BMW's plans remain vague. Though company executives say they have abandoned the old strategy of treating Rover like an independent company, they have not set new targets for cutting costs.
business
opinion
movies
t-magazine
us
fashion

