section: business
query: r200
title: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS; BMW Shares Fall on Worries Over Rover
author: Edmund L. Andrews
content: Advertisement
Supported by
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
By Edmund L. Andrews
Investors hammered shares of the Bavarian car maker BMW today, after the company's top executives gave analysts a vague and unconvincing description of their strategy for repairing Rover, the troubled British subsidiary.
BMW shares dropped more than 4 percent, to 606 euros ($565.58) from 633 euros ($590.78). The decline marked a shaky start for BMW's new chairman, Joachim Milberg, who had just made his first formal presentation to investment analysts since the ouster last month of his predecessor, Bernd Pischetsrieder.
It also signaled the depth of unease about the problems at Rover, which lost nearly $1 billion last year. The gloom appeared likely to persist even though the British Government announced late today that it would contribute an unspecified amount of money to help modernize Rover's main factory in the town of Longbridge.
Though BMW and the British Government had been haggling over the amount of financial support needed to keep the factory alive, most analysts had assumed that the two sides would reach a deal.
The bigger worries are about BMW's apparent commitment to have Rover keep building mid-priced cars, which have been the main source of Rover's problems, and how BMW would reduce Rover's costs.
Despite Mr. Milberg's attempt to show his sense of purpose, analysts complained that the company was vague and even evasive about his plans to cut costs and refocus the strategy. Deutsche Bank reduced its rating on BMW stock from ''neutral'' to ''underperform,'' while others said they had simply been disappointed by the presentation.
We are having trouble retrieving the article content.
Please enable JavaScript in your browser settings.
We are confirming your access to this article, this will take just a moment. However, if you are using Reader mode please log in, subscribe, or exit Reader mode since we are unable to verify access in that state.
Confirming article access.
If you are a subscriber, please log in.
Advertisement
